Lives and Ecologies

The research unit Lives and Ecologies studies how humans seek to shape their lives, together with humans and other living beings, under conditions of change, disruption and destruction of ecological and societal resources. How do they search for possibilities of survival, continuity, and good life? How do processes such as mobility and displacement, pollution and biodiversity loss, or wars and conflicts reorder human-environment relations, livelihoods, and intergenerational life trajectories? Research in the unit is organised in two thematic conversations: human-environmental relations, and life trajectories and livelihoods across generations.

Revisions of Rurality: Ecology, Conflict and Violence in a Changing Middle East

Through a focus on examples from Syria’s Afrin and Iraqi Kurdistan’s Duhok regions, this project interrogates the impacts of warfare and violence on rural ecologies in the Middle East. Over the last decades, many parts of the region have suffered from armed conflicts that have impacted human as well as non-human life. From burning crops to cut-down fruit trees, from groundwater polluted by residues of toxic ammunition to pastures turned lethal by unexploded ordnance and mines, years of violence have not only had devastating effects for the human population, but have also caused significant damage to the natural environment.

The immediacy and suddenness of wounds of war interact with more expansive temporal scales: violent conflicts cause long-lasting ecological effects through pollution, displacement and destruction. They may disrupt older ecological engagements going back decades or even centuries, inscribed in local landscapes, interlinking human and non-human actors. This project draws on past fieldwork on-site, on conversations and interviews with (displaced) residents of the abovementioned regions, and published accounts as well as social media posts and debates to ask: How have conflicts, warfare and violence transformed rural landscapes through changing patterns of land use, cutting forests and trees, or polluting water sources; how have they changed human-environment relations? How have they impacted livestock, vegetation, or wildlife - and how are these transformations experienced, reflected and debated by the affected communities? How do these transformations articulate with older trajectories of economic change, social division or political conflict, and to which extent do they constitute decisive and perhaps irreversible ruptures?

The two regions from which empirical examples are drawn are marked by political rifts that feeds on ethnic(ized) social boundaries, invoking Kurdish struggles for autonomy amidst other (Arab, Turkish) state-building projects. In these contexts, interventions into agrarian practices or land use patterns may be challenged or justified in terms of political or military expediency. Moreover, changing patterns of human-environmental relations may, in these settings, be invested with symbolic significance, as specific crops, lifestyles or practices may rhetorically be associated with ‘tradition’ and thus with particular social (ethnic) identities. Conversely, violent disruptions to rural ways of life may be regarded as jeopardizing not only individual livelihoods, but also as threatening such identities. In these settings, notions of ‘justice’ may come to matter in manifold ways, and are often invoked implicitly rather than explicitly.

Illustrations: 123comics, licensed under CC BY-NC-ND.

The Dream of Stability: Egyptian Migrations and Homes in the Age of Growth

At the heart of this project is a central paradox of the age of globalisation: the possibility of a stable, normal life at home relies on destabilising processes of growth, expansion, and mobility.

Rural-urban and international migrations in and from the Global South are often socially conservative projects: strivings to actualize conventional ways and ideas of a good life. Generational continuity and reproduction are central to such dreams of a normal life. Becoming an adult man in Egypt is a path of largely pre-determined steps such as financial independence, housing, marriage, offspring, and their education. This is the prime nexus of social reproduction, and at the same time also the context where generational shifts and transformations are likely to occur. “Stability” ( istiqrar ) describes the dream of completing these steps and being able to rest. Those steps reproduce moral ideals of the society, and yet their completion under conditions of growth and mobility also results in social change from one generation to another.

This project follows trajectories of men and fewer women from northern Egypt to sites of migration in Arab Gulf states (especially Dubai) and in Europe. Much of their home region will become uninhabitable by the end of the 21st century due to climate change. At the same time, most of them invest their savings into homes in their regions of origin. Aim of this project is to understand how people from regions like northern Egypt live with such and other contradictions that they cannot solve. At the focus of inquiry are three complications: To build a good life at home, it is often necessary migrate; stability in a capitalist economy requires growth, which is an unstable state; and spiritual, moral and economic values and strivings are part of the same reality but often cannot be reconciled.

The first phase of the project was funded by Fritz Thyssen Foundation from 2020 to 2022. The second phase since 2023 aims at the completion of two peer-reviewed articles and a monography with the title The Dream of Stability. Structured in four parts, the book follows the movement of people from rural regions into urban careers; the predicament and opportunities of migrant jobseekers in Dubai during the Covid-19 pandemic; the moral binary between a family home in one’s region of origin and the migrant accommodation; and the dialectic relation between spectacular accomplishments and the unacknowledged work, energy, and parallel lives that are necessary to generate them. This dialectic emerges as a key means of living with unsolved conflicts.

Future Building in Central Asia: Intergenerational Cooperation, Infrastructure, and Translocal Mobilities

This project is a comparative study on elderly care, translocal mobilities, and future building in the Soviet and post-Soviet Central Asian contexts. The project investigates the process through which elderly care is provided in different types of kin relationships in the region, together with a historical perspective on how it has changed in the period from Soviet to post-Soviet (1991 and onwards), which marked the transition from Soviet Rule to independent nation-states. For instance, during the Soviet period, the authorities attempted to limit certain types of kin ties, which have since been revived after the collapse of the Soviet Union. The Soviet Union also provided many kinds of state-led institutional care which have now, because of increased mobility in the region, taken new forms and practices. Migrant remittance is one such.

A necessary focus of my research is on Fergana Valley, as this is an area shared by Kyrgyzstan, Uzbekistan, and Tajikistan, alongside Mecca (Saudi Arabia), which therefore allows us to study a regional practice at the intersection of territorial nationalities. Fergana Valley has a high influx of emigration from the region to Russia, and therefore provides a particularly good insight into the research questions around remittances and their expenditure for hajj pilgrimages to Mecca. Investigating these contexts will help to generate valid empirical data on 1) the intergenerational support of translocal families; 2) different benefits (or lack of) from the remittances leading to investments in infrastructure, education, hajj pilgrimage to Mecca, and the translocal mobilities of elders.

Central to my research, conducted in several localities over months, will be the collection of anthropological and historical data for understanding strategies of the local elderly people adopted for building a ‘future’ for their children in Central Asia.

Migrant arrival contexts in transregional comparison. Local figurations and differing collective histories of Assyrians/Arameans in Germany and Jordan

This comparative project investigates the development of we-images, mutual disregard or conflicts between migrants of a higher “social age” and newcomers of the same ethno-religious grouping. Taking the example of Assyrian/Aramean migrants it compares their histories of settling/settlement and their incorporation in local figurations with “old-established” and other migrant groupings. It also explores the consequences of renewed influx of members of the same grouping in the same local arrival contexts. The project puts a focus on the significance of differing collective histories, collective memories and nationalities of migrants already present and those moving in.

The analysis of two local arrival contexts of Assyrians/Arameans in Eastern Westphalia (Germany) and in Amman (Jordan) is representative of figurations of migrant groupings which are influenced to this day by processes of state-building and violent conflicts in the Middle East. In roughly the past two decades Assyrian/Aramean migrants from Iraq and Syria have moved to Eastern Westphalia and Amman. However, in both contexts there is a long-established community of migrants who have considered themselves as Assyrians/Arameans for decades – in Germany mainly Turkish-speaking, in Amman mainly Arabic-speaking.

The focus of the project is on the following questions:

These two central aspects – complex local figurations and differing collective histories – are connected. They show which role similar and different historical perspectives play in processes of (not) getting together, and how this leads to changes in figurations with members of further migrant or old-established groupings. The methodological approach, a combination of sociological biographical research and figurational sociology, sharpens our view of the socio-historical dimensions of the topic and avoids an atomistic focus on one grouping. By examining the definition, size and composition of migrant groupings in their dynamics, the project makes an important conceptual contribution to processes of social boundary-making and to the analysis of internal differentiations in migrant groupings using a comparative approach.

In the Company of Plants: Multispecies Care and Migrant Home-making in Germany (DFG)

This project looks into the relationships different waves and generations of Turkish migrants develop with the plants they grow and care for in Germany, in order to shed light onto the significance of multispecies networks in the processes of home-making and integration. It starts with the understanding that social processes always necessitate the collaboration of nonhuman actors. Plants accompany people in their struggles of home-making in new environments and they share their challenges of acclimatization and adaptation. They are also carriers of meanings and memories related to belonging. While caring for their plants, migrants invest in rooting and turning a foreign place into home. Understanding how this happens requires being attentive to the intimate relationship between the migrants and their plants, as well to the ethics of care that shapes these relationships.

Slavery and Post-Slavery in South Yemen under British rule (FWF Erwin Schrödinger)

This project sheds light on the history of slavery in Yemen and its lasting repercussions. During the British protectorate in South Yemen (1872 - 1963), Western and local concepts and practices of slavery and its abolition collided, with complex societal consequences. The aim of this project is to analyse how categories of (un)freedom, social hierarchy and race were formed and reinterpreted, and how these processes affected (formerly) enslaved people and their descendants. The interdisciplinary approach of this project combines methodological and theoretical tools from anthropology and history, as well as research on slavery, gender, and race. Intersectionality is central to my analysis of different factors of inequality in (post-)slavery experiences.

Beyond Humanitarianism: Disability Care and Belonging of Afghan Veterans in Iran (DFG)

DFG Project

This ethnographic project focuses on two generations of Afghan disabled ex-combatants in Iran. For decades, Hazara Shi’a Afghan refugees in Iran have fought and been injured in two Middle Eastern wars: the Iran–Iraq war (1980–1988) and the Syrian War (2011–present). In demanding care for their injuries, Afghan refugees-cum-disabled veterans make transnational structures of Islamist militancy and humanitarianism fall within the purview of the nation-state and local relations. Drawing on concepts from the anthropology of migration and disability studies, this project looks at state care institutions as well as the social life of disabled Afghans with Iranians in poor neighbourhoods. Together, they reveal how Afghans’ war injuries are folded into exclusionary regimes of care, and local histories of political violence and destitution. Combining archival materials, life history interviews, and first-hand empirical data, this project offers a unique lens into the intersection of welfare and warfare in the Middle East. Moreover, it will provide new insights that will change the debates about the dynamics of South-to-South mobility as well as disability history in the Middle East. In addition to academic contributions and outputs, this project aims to culminate in an exhibition presenting research findings to engage the general public. Additionally, to ensure a lasting impact that is relevant to the research context, an online working group will be formed consisting of Afghan and Iranian scholars and community activists based in Iran and outside. This group will be convened regularly over a period of three years and will continually seek wider relevance and visibility to the topic of non-citizens’ disability care in Iran.

Further Information

Oil, Decolonisation and the ‘Great Acceleration’: A Translocal History of Oil Refining and Environmental Justice in the Western Indian Ocean

The mid-twentieth century was a fundamental turning point for anthropogenic effects on the planet. In the decades following the Second World War there was a ‘Great Acceleration’ marked especially by the intensification of energy consumption, particularly oil in the Global North. This project, however, shifts attention to where much of this oil came from, focusing on sites of oil production. It examines the proliferation of oil refineries in the 1950s and 1960s across the Persian/Arabian Gulf and Indian Ocean, following their political, social and environmental effects on the micro-level.

As recent scholarship shows, oil animated rising resource nationalism across the Global South in this era of decolonisation as governments sought to secure sovereignty of natural resources. Yet the rising importance of oil was not confined to oil-producing states: after all, now a multitude of oil-based products became essential for modern life, including fuels, pesticides and plastics, the production of which required refineries for the conversion of crude oil. Hence, many newly independent states across the Global South, even those without oil resources, viewed oil refineries as engines of national development. At the same time, shaken by Iran’s nationalisation of oil in 1951, which expropriated the world’s largest oil refinery, multinational oil companies sought to meet emerging markets with minimal disruption and disaggregated refining to reduce bottlenecking. As such, the 1950s and 1960s saw the construction of oil refineries in both postcolonial and colonial states, especially across the Indian Ocean, including Aden (1954), Mumbai (1954), Mombasa (1960), Karachi (1960) and Singapore (1961), adding to existing refineries in the Persian/Arabian Gulf.

Despite often being hidden from view or rendered a neutral domain of technology, this project reveals the politics inhering in oil refineries by opening the black box by which they were constructed, operated and maintained. It begins through a translocal, comparative history of three of these refineries – Abadan, Aden and Mumbai – to explore the relationship between oil and decolonisation on the ground, asking the following questions: How did multinational oil companies negotiate local entanglements when faced with growing postcolonial aspirations and anticolonial movements, especially learning the lessons of Iranian oil nationalisation? What was the relationship between corporate sovereignty and post-Fordism, especially through the lens of oil expertise, labour and infrastructure? What was the social and environmental impact of these refineries, and how did issues around pollution, toxicity and environmental justice intersect with categories of gender, race, class and caste? How do these histories connect the global climate crisis with colonialism, postcolonial development, and global capitalism?

Highly-Qualified Syrian Circassian Refugees in Multicultural Capitals of Amsterdam and Berlin: Challenges and Opportunities (Gerda Henkel Foundation)

Ongoing global conflicts, natural disasters, and the rise of nationalism and authoritarianism have led to significant displacement around the world. According to the UNHCR, the Syrian war, which began in 2011, has forcibly displaced over 12 million people. Furthermore, the earthquakes in February 2023 affected 8.8 million individuals, destroying homes and displacing even more people. Turkey, which hosted around 4 million Syrian refugees, signed the 'EU-Turkey Refugee Deal' in 2016, exchanging refugee management for financial aid from Europe. Neighbouring countries such as Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, and Lebanon have hosted approximately 2 million Syrian refugees, while 1 million have resettled in European countries. This research argues that highly skilled forced migrants or refugees, such as scholars or journalists, often struggle to maintain their competitive edge in new host countries. For instance, some displaced associate professors seek recognition of their qualifications as equivalent to a 'habilitation' in Germany or Austria. However, the European academic structure rarely enables displaced scholars to secure full-time professorships due to limited positions. This dilemma also affects postdoctoral researchers, with many forced to leave academia after 12 years. Precarious situations, like those experienced by the 'Mittelbau,' impact displaced and refugee scholars who rely on short-term scholarships. Nonetheless, some may secure longer-term funding if they demonstrate strong publication records, particularly through DFG or ERC grants. This cross-cultural and interdisciplinary research aims to investigate the life journeys, work trajectories, labour market integration, and societal participation of highly qualified Syrian Circassian refugees, displaced for the fourth time, in two multicultural capitals: Berlin and Amsterdam. The study will explore multiple displacements, Circassian diaspora networks and their solidarity mechanisms, and the challenges faced by these refugees. The research seeks to understand how these networks contribute to their labour market integration and societal participation while identifying the challenges encountered along the way.

Fisherfolk of the Steppe: Water, Resource Use, and Environmental Transformation in Kazakhstan, 1950s–Present

While Kazakhstan is commonly known as a land of herders and steppes, it has a less known identity as a country of lakes and fisherfolk. Subsistence fishing has long existed along Kazakhstan’s rivers and lakes, and industrial fisheries established during the Soviet period made it the second-largest fish producer in the USSR after Russia. This project aims to renew our understanding of Soviet projects of environmental transformation and economic development in Central Asia by inscribing the study both at the international and place-based levels. Soviet fisheries largely followed global trends of the 20th century, adopting similar chronologies and technologies. To understand the specificities of the Soviet and Kazakh contexts, I focus on the lived experiences of those directly involved in fish capture and farming. The key question is how bottom-up dynamics, together with the global circulation of knowledge and technology in fisheries, shaped the implementation and appropriation of transformative, extractive projects to develop wild fish capture and farmed fish production in Kazakhstan.

Bahari yetu (Our ocean/genre) – A Matrifocal Anthropological Study of Oral Archives and Embodied Knowledge Practices Along the Swahili Coast

This research project takes as a point of departure the Swahili concept of bahari , which means “genre” and “ocean” at the same time, in order to explore knowledge practices on the Northern Swahili coast through a matrifocal ethnographic lens. The project examines oral art, i.e. music and dance performances, called ngoma , as sites of knowledge. Ngoma performances are not only sites for cultural, political, religious and historical cognition, but are, in the first place, sites of social, ethical, philosophical, linguistic and rhetorical education. In the pursuit of understanding Swahili notions and concepts of knowledge, I propose to unravel how ideas of oral literary genres shed light on the specific ways of becoming, being and moving in this part of the Western Indian Ocean. I will achieve this through an in-depth analysis of the ways in which local experts and specialists, such as healers, teachers, poets, oral art performers and curators collect, preserve, transmit, utilise, produce and perform various oral and textual Swahili knowledge genres ( bahari ).

As in pre-dominantly oral societies, theoretical and practical knowledge are closely intertwined, this inquiry includes the study of original Swahili occupations such as navigation (land and sea), healing, composing, carving and weaving. Through a matrifocal lens that counters the “ patriarchal bias in [the] understanding and interpretation of African data ” (Amadiume 2011:152 f.), I direct the overall focus of the project towards female-based cognizance and matriarchal elements in Swahili society – an omission that has so far only been explicitly addressed by Kelly Askew (1999). This also serves to centre female-generated moral and political philosophy, to study Muslim societies as matri- and not patrifocal settings, and to contribute to an active non-Eurocentric recognition of other ways of knowing and perceiving reality (i.e. time, history, space and place).

The research also contributes to an empirically-grounded conceptualisation of knowledge by including local experts and actors as collaborative colleagues in the project evolvement.

Knowledge, Temporalities and Questions of Justice. Negotiating Coastal Futures in West Africa in Times of Climate Change

This project seeks to explore how climate change informs coastal planning and development in Senegal, West Africa, and the knowledge(s), predictions, narratives and movements involved. Consequences of global warming are already affecting livelihoods in West Africa, leading to an entanglement of 'actual' experience and model-based predictions of rising sea levels, salinization of river estuaries and declining fish stocks. At the same time, both international and regional actors like Morocco, in its role as a 'leader' in green development, are trying to "mainstream" climate mitigation and adaptation into the process of planning and coastal and regional development, altering regional economic dynamic and negotiating different development paths. Drawing on theory and methods from Political Ecology, Environmental Anthropology and Science and Technology, this project aims at studying these developments to explore the relation between different forms of knowledge(s) related to climate change, imaginaries of the future and the material infrastructures, practices and movements they inform as.
