Religion and Intellectual Culture

How does religion provide orientation in life, through practice, and in conceptual terms, from the perspective of social actors? How is intellectual culture shaped and cultivated, in religious or non-religious contexts? How does religiosity interrelate with morality and intellectual culture? This research unit examines the fields of ‘religion’ and ‘intellectual culture’, loosely conceived, with particular interest also in the interplay between religion, intellectual culture, and everyday life across diverse societies. Hereby, the focus is largely, but not exclusively, on the ‘Muslim world’, from different disciplinary angles. Religion(s) are studied both as discursive traditions and as dynamic sets of unifying (but often contested) norms and practices in different kinds of lifeworlds. The understanding of intellectual culture encompasses a set of historically grown and regionally specific narratives and knowledge-oriented practices that often reflect a specific sense of how to live a meaningful life. These may also be linked to religious traditions as well as (trans)regional social and intellectual histories. The relations (and tensions) between religious and intellectual world-making are of specific concern. Of particular interest are also the ways in which technological innovations re-shape human experience.

Boko: Europe, Intellectualism and Religiosity in Hausa Context

This project offers some reflections on the concept of boko, focusing on the ways in which it constructs Europe and articulates a critique of both schooling and intellectualism in Hausa contexts in West Africa. Boko is usually associated with the secular, and most importantly, the Euro-secular episteme that imposed itself onto many through a system of thought (modern rationalism), a social practice (school and schooling) and political project (modern state). It is one of those Hausa concepts that emerged within the European colonial context to nurture intellectual culture, trigger emancipatory politics and boost religiosity.

Contested Knowledge, Sociality, and Religion: Intellectual Culture Under Postcolonial Conditions on the Swahili Coast and Beyond

This project documents and analyzes biographical pathways, social engagements, and communally related topical concerns in the trajectories of relevant influential figures (social leaders, activists, thinkers and teachers) in the Swahili region, who are largely identified, or identify themselves, as Muslim scholars or Islamic intellectuals. How are these agents embedded in society; by what means and actions do they gain recognition; and how do they gain and increase followers and influence (while committed to different ideological agendas, in terms of politics, Islamic reform, etc.)?

These questions are pursued in a collaboration with academic and non-academic scholars from the region, and combining ethnography and archival research with close readings, interviews and dialogical exchanges with local interlocutors (in person and by social media). Thus by means of an ethnographic pathway that combines fieldwork methods with contextualizing readings and interpretations of materials, this project engages in a new approach to the study of local intellectuals and public debate, and regional intellectual history and the intellectual practice of individual agents, as engrained in regional history and social experience. Hereby, attention to the dimensions of postcolonial experience more generally, as well as the specific political tensions between Muslims and the state – that play out differently in Kenya and Tanzania, also with a view to their wider transregional connections – is an important concern. The concrete initial focus is on handful of scholars from Lamu, on the Northern Swahili coast, with a view to pursuing contrasting case studies in a complementary consecutive phase.

The 'Omani Enlightenment': Circulation of Ideas and the Cultivation of Critical Thought in the Sultanate of Oman

My postdoctoral research can be understood as a study of intellectual life within the broader context of intensifying cultural globalization, characterized by the increasing circulation of books, ideas, and the intellectuals who act as their carriers. Grounded in ongoing ethnographic fieldwork in the Sultanate of Oman, it addresses two interrelated objectives. First, I investigate the social life of ideas through a materialist framework, focusing on their "exchangeability" within the market of ideas. Ideas, as dual entities embodying both commodities and meanings, are intrinsically tied to the material forms that enable their dissemination. In the specific sociopolitical context of Oman, I analyze the mechanisms that facilitate or hinder the production, circulation, diffusion, and eventual stabilization of ideas and critical theories articulated by Omani intellectuals—ideas that increasingly transcend the monitored territorial sovereignty of the nation-state. Second, I conduct an ethnographic analysis of intellectual practices and cognitive reasoning within majālis (intellectual salons). In particular, I examine what it means for certain Omani intellectuals to attain the status of what they themselves describe as "critical intellectuals." This inquiry centers on the cultivation and acquisition of critical dispositions and debating skills through processes of situated learning and legitimate participation in communities of practice composed of like-minded critical intellectuals. At a more micro-level, I examine how ideas and representations drawn from diverse intellectual or religious traditions are debated, confronted, and at times reflexively appropriated by these intellectuals. Through this dynamic engagement, they construct their ethos as critical intellectuals, employing metacognitive strategies to evaluate reflexively the epistemological status of the representations and ideas they engage with to understand and navigate the world.

In Search of a ‘New Orthodoxy': Islamic Education in Post-Soviet Tatarstan

The study aims to examine who and how control public discourse and form a "New Orthodoxy" in the field of Islam and religious education in the Republic of Tatarstan? How the “Orthodoxy” is shifting in the context of changing religious elites in the Republic (from the end of 1990 till the beginning of 2020-es)? What are the instruments of the state (at the Federal and Republican levels) in its influence on the sphere of religious education and what goals it outlines for itself; how the general direction of the state policy towards centralization and the support of "traditional values" and reliance on conservative circles reflected in the sphere of religious education. And finally how the local religious and secular communities respond to the challenges of the times: for example, the influence of International Islamic movements, policies of the secular state, low religious observance of local Muslims and many others.

Hassan Heshmat – A Decolonial Artist, Then and Now

This project investigates the Werkbiographie of Egyptian sculptor Hassan Heshmat (1920-2006), who rose to national and international recognition in the times of Gamal Abdel Nasser. Hassan Heshmat is considered a pioneer of modern Egyptian art. He was the first Egyptian artist to create artworks in porcelain with local motifs and with the explicit aim that average households could acquire a piece of art.

Born in Menoufiya, Hassan Heshmat was a student of the renowned potter, painter, and sculptor of Palestinian origin, Said el Sadr (1909-1986). Heshmat graduated with a diploma in Ceramics from the Centre for Applied Arts at Cairo University in 1938. To earn his living, he continued with a diploma in Art Education in 1954. Subsequently, he went to West Germany for a year to study at the Artistic Porcelain Academy in Selb, graduating in 1958. As the hometown of two internationally renowned porcelain manufacturers, Rosenthal and Hutschenreuther, Selb was already an international hub for students at the time.

His sculptures often reflect themes from rural Egyptian society, the working class, the arts, or ongoing political events, like the crossing of the Suez Canal in 1973 or the killing of 21 missionaries in Congo – a memorial commissioned by the Order of the Holy Cross in Hasselt, Belgium, in 1970. During the era of Hosni Mubarak, Heshmat received the Egyptian state’s Appreciation Award. After his death, his private home, including his workshop with three ceramic kilns, exhibit space, and garden in Ain Shams, was turned into a public museum. Current tours stress the aspect of love and unity between man and woman and the entity of the family in Heshmat’s works.

Heshmat mastered various materials beyond porcelain, like metal, stone, wood, and clay, and he worked in all sizes between 5cm and ca. 10m. A number of large murals by him can be found in Egypt and around the world. His pieces are sold today on various online platforms (eBay, classified ads, artnet.com, mutualart.com, or etsy), but not much is known about the artist himself. Secondary literature in Arabic is scarce and nearly non-existent in European languages.

The project investigates a history of ideas in his works, including social realism, the democratization of art, neo-pharaonism, and Pop Art. It asks how changing debates about decolonization during his lifetime and today are reflected in his works.

When Anonymity is No Longer Enough: 'Fictionalization' as a New Way of Writing Ethnography in the Age of Digital Surveillance

(Together with Jürgen Schaflechner, FU-Berlin)

This project investigates how contemporary regimes of data tracking and algorithmic identification reshape notions of anonymity, privacy, and control in ethnographic writing. While anonymity has long been a concern in research ethics, today’s data-driven infrastructures render true anonymity increasingly fragile. The research examines how tracking technologies, originally designed for targeted advertising and behavioral prediction, produce new forms of social control and vulnerability, particularly in contexts of rising authoritarianism. By analyzing data points within ethnographic texts, the project explores how dispersed digital traces are recombined into powerful mechanisms of identification and governance. Ultimately, it aims to theorize how ethnographic texts can be written in ways that disperse personas, times, and places to avoid being corroborated as data points. Can one still write in ways that make it impossible for AI to identify a person? What degree of fictionalization is necessary and viable in each specific case under discussion?

The Ghadames Heritage Project

Digitization and Heritage Protection: Ghadames as a Laboratory of Community-Based and Collaborative Strategies

This project, based at Leibniz-Zentrum Moderner Orient in Berlin and supported by the Patrimonies Funding Initiative of the Gerda Henkel Stiftung , is developed with the University of Tripoli and the Ecole nationale d’architecture et d’urbanisme of Tunis, in cooperation with the Ghadames Association for Heritage and Conservation (Jam’iyya Ghadames lil-Turâth wal-Mahfuzât). It aims to digitize a large amount of high-value historical archives and manuscripts that have been partially saved from the rubbles of buildings in Ghadames (Libya) that were destroyed during World War II.

The Contending Political Theologies of Pakistan’s Transnational Islamic Actors: A Comparison of Mainstream Deobandi Discourses and Militant Islamism

This doctoral project seeks to analyse competing political theologies resulting from different interpretations and applications of the influential Sunni-Islamic orientation of Deobandis – within their network of Islamic schools (madrasas), on one side, and by militant Islamist actors associated with the same denomination, on the other. The Deobandi seminary network, following its head school Dārul Uloom Deoband in North India (est. 1866), is a locally dominant system with over 20,000 registered seminaries in Pakistan and a significant translocal outreach through the preaching movement of the Tablighi Jama’at; though it has also inspired militant groupings, notably the Taliban in Afghanistan and Pakistan. Therefore, academic studies and policy literature are marred with considerable ambiguity with regard to the potential of Deobandi ulamā to opt for violent means. The obscure Deobandi madrassa sector requires deeper academic scrutiny, both for bringing precision to characterizations of Pakistan-based transnational Islamic actors, and for accurately determining their place in the over-all threat spectrum.

Hence, this study aims to understand the contending Deobandi articulations and legitimations of an idealized Islamic order in domestic and international contexts. Pre-existing textual data is utilized that mainly comprises of: fatāwa (religious edicts) and programmatic statements by leading mainstream and radical figures, and the monthly periodical of the official Deobandi madrasa board, Wifāq-ul Madāris. This data will be analysed to establish the divergence and inter-textuality of perspectives regarding tensions over violent rebellions in Muslim polities, ‘jihad’ and relations with non-Muslim polities. The findings will have considerable utility for policy-making aimed at enhancing human security and social cohesion in South Asia, and in regions having diasporic presence of South Asian Muslims.

Ethics in the Realist Idealism of Rabat School: Al-Fassi, Lahbabi, and Taha

This chapter introduces aspects of moral philosophy in contemporary Rabat School. Three influential figures of the school are comparatively read as champions of “realist idealism”: Allal al-Fassi (1910-1974), Mohammed Aziz Lahbabi (1922-1993), and Abderrahmane Taha (b. 1944). Each of the three is introduced through a major concept from his overall works: the concept of “original disposition” for al-Fassi, “Muslim personalism,” for Lahbabi, and “trusteeship paradigm” for Taha. These concepts are taken as their major contribution to the question of ethics and how they can change the individual and society, and by implication human societies at large. To understand the three moralist readings above, they need to be contextualized first, which the first part of the chapter does. While these three major figures are read as “realist idealists,” since they underline the rational in sharia classical law prescriptions, and its overall objectives in the light of reading the ethical message of the Quran and Prophetic experience, their counterparts are the “idealists” or “traditionalist,” and the “rationalists” or the “liberals.” The chapter then shows how al-Fassi and Lahbabi emphacize the applied ethics of sharia and Quranic ethos for collective social change, while Taha shows how he emphacizes individual change first through “spiritual self-criticism,” a target he considers the primal remedy to correct the errors of unethical modernity that Muslims, like the rest of the world, have been contaminated with, besides their own internal unethical practices.

Preaching and Teaching: Religiosity, Knowledge and Performance at the Université Abdou Moumouni de Niamey, Niger

This project focuses on religiosity and its manifestations among students and lecturers on the Université Abdou Moumouni campus of Niamey, Niger. It investigates how students and lecturers communicate, learn and teach, in other words, how they interact at university while they live, experience and practice their religion every day. It explores how lecturers and preachers perform their social role, respectively as academic and moral actors of this institution of higher education, but also how students, like an audience, react to what they are told. These actors envision or even embody ideals of life and seek ways to improve the society they're living in. How to achieve and live a righteous, successful, and "Good Life" is a central question for students and the university a crucial place for promoting the right knowledge for people and for the society.

This project seeks to contribute to the anthropology of religion in contemporary West-Africa. It approaches religious manifestations through the lenses of “performance” and “performativity” in order to interrogate the physical, visible, and audible means through which religion establishes itself on university campuses. It also investigates how knowledge is appropriated, considered, passed on, utilized or contested in different contexts by both Salafi and Pentecostals. These religious actors are rather used to qualify broader religious trends that one would find on the campuses. Which spaces does religion occupy or seek to pervade, both physically and mentally? How do religious practices shape campus life? Does religiosity affect academic practice and eventually challenge academic knowledge?

In addition to the written study, this project will produce an ethnographic film that conceptualizes the research within the field of visual anthropology. The film will attempt to give a general account of campus life as well as to portray a few individuals’ lives, and to highlight the performativity of academic and religious practices. This study of social interactions and performances in this sahelian university sheds new light on the relationship between academic knowledge and religious knowledge.

(Remoboko, Leibniz-Junior Research Group, in Cooperation with IFRA Nigeria, LASDEL)

The Kano Mind: The Formation of a Modern Hybrid Muslim Elite, its World View, and its Social Cultural Influence on Kano Muslim Society c. 1945-2003

This study transcends the traditional classifications of contemporary Kano Muslim intellectuals, whom I designate as hybrid Muslim elites, based on the roles of different groups, including Sufi orders and the Salafi movement, with the Izala sect being particularly prominent. In contrast to the Turūq or Salafi expressions of faith, these hybrid Muslims engaged in collaboration irrespective of their sectarian affiliations. The rise of this vibrant group is linked to the Islamiyya school system, initiated by traditional Muslim elites as a proactive measure against the pervasive impact of Western secular education on Muslim ethical values, especially in relation to child upbringing. As a result, the first Islamiyya School was established in the mid-1940s to cater to children enrolled in Western-style educational institutions. Over time, the Islamiyya system evolved into a comprehensive educational framework that integrated both Western and Islamic curricula. This model was later adopted by formal educational establishments, including high schools, colleges, and universities, thus nurturing a generation of hybrid intellectuals proficient in both Islamic and Western secular knowledge. These Muslim elites, endowed with a range of intellectual skills, have played a crucial role in shaping the religious landscape of Kano. The analysis conducted in this study highlights the notable impact of hybrid Muslims, who have engaged in both horizontal and vertical forms of activism. These concepts reflect a profound dedication to religious beliefs and Islamic values, roles that have historically been linked to the traditional ulama.

Memorialization of Holy Wars: Commemorative Practices and Memorial Policies in Morocco and Spain

The historical connections between the peoples of both sides of the western Mediterranean have been shaped over the centuries by multifaceted dynamics of trade, conquest, colonization, and converting. Spain's history witnessed nearly eight centuries of Islamic civilization (inaugurated with the disembarkation of the Muslim army led by the Berber commander Tariq ibn Ziyad, on the Iberian Peninsula) followed by the Christian reconquest, and since the end of the fifteenth century, this country maintained a presence on the Moroccan coast through a number of strongholds from which it extended its influence, culminating in the establishment of the Spanish protectorate over northern and southern Morocco.

The memorialization of holy wars embodies a crucial component of cultural and national identity in both Morocco and Spain. While Morocco reflects on the loss of its historical territories in Spain, and mourns the golden era that was brought to an end by the expulsion of the Moriscos from Spain, the latter often portrays the Reconquista as a unifying national narrative that emphasizes themes of Christian courage and triumph.

The complexities surrounding these historical interpretations cry out for a meticulous scrutiny that not only sheds light on the commemorative practices but also critically analyzes the memorial policies that guide these practices.

Digital Humanities and Artificial Intelligence in African Studies

The convergence of digital humanities (DH) and artificial intelligence (AI) is transforming the way knowledge is produced in African studies. This intersection provides unparalleled opportunities to reimagine cultural heritage, expand access to diverse narratives, and amplify marginalised voices. This research agenda navigates this rapidly evolving landscape by examining how scholars can do more than simply digitise archives, and address the structural inequalities inherent in global knowledge systems. As the field approaches an AI-driven "tipping point", the project will explore methods for designing, evaluating and sustaining digital infrastructures. Crucially, these systems must be based on African epistemologies, rather than simply retrofitting Western paradigms to local contexts.

These critical enquiries form the basis of a collaborative research initiative comprising two workshops in 2026 and an upcoming co-edited volume entitled Digital Humanities and Artificial Intelligence in African Studies, to be published by Bielefeld University Press. Bringing together scholars and practitioners from Africa, Europe and beyond, the project facilitates essential dialogue between the Global North and South. The initiative interrogates three interconnected themes: transforming research methods through computational tools, building sustainable infrastructures in resource-constrained settings, and centring African knowledge systems in digital design. By shifting the focus from abstract policy governance to "practising with AI", this work charts pathways for the ethical development of DH across the continent.

My contribution addresses the practical "problem of scale" in African digital collections. Charting my evolution from "digital hoarder" to "historian-programmer," I explore the democratising potential of "vibe coding" by using natural language prompts to generate executable code. I contend that pipelines utilising Large Language Models (LLMs) can efficiently streamline labour-intensive processes such as optical character recognition (OCR) and named entity recognition (NER). By developing these Python-based workflows , I show how vast, under-resourced collections can be made more accessible. This AI-assisted approach transforms static archives into dynamic, interactive visualisations , ranging from network maps to word clouds, that facilitate independent hypothesis testing and cross-disciplinary dialogue.

These methodological innovations have been prototyped within the Islam West Africa Collection , with its 28-million-word corpus serving as a testing ground for the limits of AI in historical research. Embracing Moretti's (2000) concept of " distant reading ", I posit AI not as a replacement for human judgement, but as a "co-intelligence" ( Mollick, 2024 ) that can navigate corpora which are too large to read in their entirety. For example, I use AI-powered sentiment analysis to investigate how Islam and Muslims are represented in Francophone West African newspapers, with the results visualised in an interactive dashboard . Ultimately, this research suggests that AI is not a replacement for human judgement, but rather a pragmatic and scalable solution for processing the vast amount of digital material that will define the future of African history.

Link to the VW-funded workshop: https://fmadore.github.io/dh-ai-african-studies-2026/

Shāfiʿī Commentaries and Translocal Scholarly Dynamics: Between the Mamluk Sultanate and the Bū Saʿīdī Swahili Coast

It is widely acknowledged that commentaries played a crucial role in the post-classical Islamic intellectual tradition, including in Jurisprudence. However, the underlying factors that make commentaries important, as well as the reasons for their varying degrees of success, still need to be explored. What distinguished particular commentaries in terms of their canonicity relative to others? What roles did commentaries play within the Islamic legal culture? These are pertinent questions for understanding the development of post-classical Islamic Jurisprudence (fiqh) in a broader sense, and specifically in Shāfiʿism, one of the four major legal schools in Sunni Islam. This project explores how and why certain Shāfiʿī commentaries gained authoritative status from their creation during the Mamluk Sultanate (1250-1517) and in the centuries that followed, to their reception and use along the Bū Saʿīdī-administered Swahili coast (1856-1964). As such, the project aims to reorient research on the translocal dynamics within the field of Islamic Studies and extend its implications to broader areas of historical and religious scholarship. It targets to offer a framework for integrating textual analysis and historical and anthropological methods to investigate the processes of adaptation, continuity, and transformation of Islamic legal practices. With a special focus on the Swahili Coast of East Africa, the project aims to alleviate the Middle East-centeredness of research on the textual history of Shāfiʿī fiqh in particular, and Islamic jurisprudence in general.

VR Islam? Systems of Sensory Perception in Virtual Reality and the Prospects of Virtual Devotion in Islam

This research raises new and exciting questions about the use of VR technologies in religious devotion and ritual practice. It shows how VR technologies make it possible to render the Sacred tangible and perceptible to the human senses and how that can strengthen affective bonds between human and more-than-human beings in religious life-worlds. On the other hand, it engages with the concerns and fears of religious digital content creators and users, including the fear that interactivity may lead to the “manipulation and distortion of the creed” and “transform religion … into a video game, determined not by God Almighty, but by the choices of the gamer” as well as the concern that immersiveness may result in “overstepping the boundaries of appropriateness and decency” in the relationship between the profane and the Sacred. I survey the opinions of VR content creators and users, revealing that attitudes toward the use of VR in Islamic devotion coincide noticeably with generational and gender divides. I ask what all of this means for the future of religion and VR, sketching in the process new directions in the study of sensory-perceptual systems and immersive experience in VR, the value and virtue of virtual action, and the im/permissibility of virtual interaction in religious contexts and beyond.

Islam West Africa Collection

Alongside his research project, Dr. Frédérick Madore works on the Islam West Africa Collection . It is a collaborative, open-access digital database that currently contains over 12,500 archival documents, newspaper articles, Islamic publications of various kinds, audio and video recordings, photographs, and references on Islam and Muslims in Burkina Faso, Benin, Niger, Nigeria, Togo and Côte d‘Ivoire. This project, funded by the Berlin Senate Department for Science, Health and Care, is a continuation of the award-winning Islam Burkina Faso Collection created in 2021 in collaboration with the University of Florida (USA).
