State and Society

This programme area examines how social groups, movements, and networks create, represent, and challenge state and society in their respective regional contexts. In particular, it seeks to explore the factors that contribute to the transformation of social orders. The programme area emphasizes historical analysis, even if it is fundamentally interdisciplinary in nature.

Two research perspectives are at the centre of the discussion: one, a bottom-up perspective which pays attention to local practices and interpretations, and two, the role of memory and memory-culture in the constitution and contestation of social orders.

The first perspective focuses on local ideas of the state, statehood, and other institutional forms of social and political order , some of which differed greatly from the ideas of centralized state or international actors. The focus is less on discourse analysis than on concrete practices that shape relationships between different groups and between these groups and the state. The translocal approach enables the programme area to understand processes of constitution and disruption of states, nations, and other social and political groups and orders.

Memory and the culture of remembrance enables to explore the wider forms of social engagement with the state, both at the time of constitution of and contestation over state practices as well as retrospectively. The memory of successful, or retrospectively idealized or failed communities or states will play just as important a role as the memory of experienced or perceived (in)justice. Researchers explore how memory is activated to achieve political or civil society mobilization, which in turn is linked to questions that are central to local practices of state functioning and legitimation of a particular social order.

The twin approach helps connect larger group projects with individual ones to develop a productive dialogue within the programme area.

Historical Icons and Representations of the Past

This project examines the making, utilization and impact of the construction of role models in late colonial and post-colonial India. At the center of its inquiry are historical personalities who have been iconized as models. The project emphasizes the process of the making of such figures, which are based on a recourse to history, linking different temporalities to one another, thereby creating references between present and absent times (Landwehr). A central concern is to work out the linkages between role-model constructions and their ensuing historical images (Geschichtsbilder) on the one hand, and, unpacking expectations of an idealized future that are attached to them on the other. The project explores the socio-political conditions under which a historical personality is assigned or denied the epithet of a role model as well as the corresponding motivations behind such processes. How and with which means is the making of icons implemented? This objective not only requires an examination of the producers and recipients of the constructed historical icon but also necessitates investigations into the role of media and materiality. Competing narratives in textual sources are evaluated along with visual material or objects and monuments.

The overarching research questions include: What is the relationship between historical documentation and evidence-based knowledge on the one hand and alienation, transfiguration, heroization on the other? What objectives do historical role models serve for both producers and recipients and how does their story change from an individual biography to a universal source of morality and action? Which processes of valuing, revaluing or devaluing the past become the foundational basis for dealing with role models?

An Oasis Facing Globalisation: The History and Development of Hegra (Saudi Arabia) since the late 19th Century

This project investigates the past 150 years of an oasis which has for centuries been a major station of caravan routes in the north-western Arabian Peninsula. It zooms in on two major transformative events which have reconfigured the relationship of the oasis, its Bedouin neighbours and statehood. The first of these events is the establishment of the Hejaz railway in the early 20th century, the second the current development of the oasis as a major centre for tourism and culture. The project investigates these histories, as well as their representation in local memory and historiography.

Learning to Feel Like a Nation: Nationalism and Emotions in Turkish School Books

How do we learn to think, feel, and act as a member of a nation? How does the sense of national belonging become a part of our common sense? This project explores these hitherto understudied questions by investigating the dynamics of instilling national sentiments into children’s minds in Turkish schools. It analyzes national(ist) narratives in primary- and secondary-school textbooks, which represent the historical and contemporary sociopolitical reality from a nation-centered perspective.

The project focuses on Turkey as a highly-informative case due to its centralized school system, and the unquestionable dominance of a nationalist ideology. It deals especially with the last four decades (1980–2020), during which the country has experienced a transition from a military-overseen secular political regime to an Islamic-conservative one. This enables the researcher to observe continuity, as well as change, in national(ist) narratives during this period of seemingly significant sociopolitical transformation.

By bringing together empirical, methodological, and conceptual contributions from the sociology of knowledge, the history and sociology of emotions, cognitive science, narratology, and nationalism studies, this project aims at shedding new light on the influence of nationalism on our individual and collective minds.

An Anthropological Study of the Impact and Repercussions of Chinese BRI projects in Coastal Kenya

This PhD study seeks to examine the impact and repercussions of recent Chinese Belt-and-Road-Initiative (BRI) projects in Coastal Kenya. The study focuses on major Chinese infrastructure projects including a) the modern standard – gauge railroad (SGR) from coastal city of Mombasa to Nairobi, Kenya’s capital city and b) a deep-water seaport near the historical port-town of Lamu, aimed to serve neighboring landlocked Ethiopia and Southern Sudan. The SGR railroad project (completed in 2018) in fact implemented the cessation of the usage of Mombasa’s deep-sea port for the clearance of all goods and commodities – these were now to be cleared far upcountry in Naivasha. This has aroused a plethora of destructive effects on the income situations and daily lives of coastal residents who used to be reliant on activities around Mombasa port. This project follows related questions and examines multiple ways local residents and communities have been affected by these projects.

The study focuses on the unfolding repercussions and investigates it in its wider historical and political context, especially with a view to Kenya-China relationships. It pursues ethnographic fieldwork, following the perspectives of regional residents, and uses archival work, grounded theory, urban anthropology, and transregional fieldwork in China - in order to connect with all the respective relevant perspectives and narratives. The study focuses on disruption of livelihoods of the coastal population and related forms of disorientation(s). It builds on a strong sense of familiarity with local experiences (among coastals) and transregional visions and interactions (of/with the Chinese), while using translocality and the image of ‘translocal entanglements’ as a heuristic analytic lens.

Archival Imaginaries and the Politics of History in South Asia

The past decade has seen the proliferation of ‘citizens archives’, ‘picture libraries’ and ‘memory projects’ dedicated to the history of South Asia. I first encountered these platforms, which mobilise visual and material artefacts, and range from purpose-built websites to Instagram handles and Facebook groups that spill over into exhibitions and coffee table books, whilst researching the development of amateur and domestic photography in the subcontinent. Images that had hitherto been stored in albums and trunks or tucked away in letters were suddenly available online, annotated, animated and reconfigured by the efforts of family members, artists, designers, entrepreneurs, volunteers and audiences both local and global.

My new project grapples with this apparent archival abundance, this traffic in ‘pictures’ and ‘memories’. I probe the logics and logistics that have brought these materials to the surface, and the work that goes in to keeping them there. I also look at the persistence of older, institutional and activist modes of retrieval and representation. In pursuing an ethnography of archival imaginaries and agents, I hope to better account for how history is flattened into and fashioned out of everyday matter, and how it takes political shape.

Modern India in German Archives, 1706–1989 (MIDA)

Long-term project supported by the German Research Council (DFG) with the participation of Prof. Dr. Ravi Ahuja, Centre for Modern Indian Studies (CeMIS), Universität Göttingen, Dr. Heike Liebau, Leibniz-Zentrum Moderner Orient (ZMO) Berlin, and Prof. Dr. Michael Mann, Institut für Asien- und Afrikawissenschaften (IAAW), HU Berlin.

Modern Indian Literature in Translation in the GDR – Between Ideology, Censorship and Cultural Diplomacy

This project considers translations from modern Indian languages, including Indian English, which were published in the GDR in a field of tension between ideology and cultural diplomacy. With reference to the official framework of publishing in the GDR, which was characterised by the institutionalised practice of censorship, the discourse on the political-ideological evaluation of the text and the author is analysed. In addition, the literary and aesthetic evaluation of the texts is of interest, especially with regard to a postulated ideal of an “international contemporary literature” acceptable for the “Leseland” / “reading country” GDR. Between 1963 and 1990, there were a total of ca. 45 such translations from Indian languages, which were initially often mediated via English or Russian.

Two case studies are planned: one deals with the discourse that accompanied the politically motivated publication of translations of Tagore’s literary works for the centenary celebrations, while another focuses on controversial translations from the entire period under consideration. The role of the actors – publishers’ editors, reviewers, translators and cultural functionaries - will also be considered. I assume that the analyses of the evaluations of literary works from modern South Asian languages will show that they reflect political developments in the GDR, internal cultural policy and bilateral relations between India and the GDR. This will shed light on the role of translations in the cultural diplomacy of the GDR towards India before the political recognition of the GDR and on the growing autonomy of literary experts and their evaluations from the early 1970s onwards. In this way, I hope to situate these published translations within the broader framework of the entangled relations of South Asia and the GDR in the fields of literature, culture and politics.

This research project is part of Modern India in German Archives, 1706–1989 (MIDA), a long-term project supported by the German Research Council (DFG) with the participation of Prof. Dr. Ravi Ahuja, Centre for Modern Indian Studies (CeMIS), Universität Göttingen, Dr. Heike Liebau , Leibniz-Zentrum Moderner Orient (ZMO) Berlin, and Prof. Dr. Michael Mann, Institut für Asien- und Afrikawissenschaften (IAAW), HU Berlin.

State of Tranquillity? Affect, Atmosphere and Violence in Early Colonial Bengal

My dissertation aims to enrich the current research on the nexus of affect and violence in colonial India. I seek to answer the questions of how different affects were entangled and intermixed, how these affects were lived and materialised in the socio-physical space, and how these materialised affects enabled and facilitated the use of violence. Through these questions, I aim to challenge romanticised historical accounts of the British Empire and contribute to the ongoing debate on colonial violence by highlighting the significance of atmospheric practices as preconditions for violent action.

I explore the relationship between affect and violence at the beginning of the colonial period in Bengal, from 1756 to 1793, when the East India Company rose from a trading company to become the local ruler of Bengal. This rise was accompanied by an affective reorganisation characterised by a slow shift from a fluid and interactive relationship between the Company officials and local intermediaries to a more distant, sceptical, suspicious and racialised one.

During this period, I will first seek to gain a deeper understanding of the overall affective landscape of the British community, and how it has changed over the years. Rather than focusing on one affect or one social group, I analyse the affective landscape as multi-layered, with different affects conflicting or converging, dampening or amplifying each other. Only this complex of different, intermixed affects, I argue, can adequately capture the violent nature of the British Empire in India.

Secondly, I focus on affect as a relation between bodies and things that inhabit and shape socio-physical space. Through the notion of atmosphere, I trace the physical materialisations of affect and how the affective lives of individuals are both expressed through and shaped by the spaces they inhabit. Architecture or spatial rituals are then seen as affective practices that create and change an atmosphere. In this sense, the British created or appropriated specific spaces and rituals in order to feel at home and to create an atmosphere of security and homeliness.

Finally, I will consider how British atmospheric practices created conditions that allowed colonial violence to emerge in both everyday interactions and extraordinary excesses. I argue that by shaping the socio-physical space, the British created an atmosphere of tension that facilitated violence. The practices they used to reduce or counteract their anxiety were always already accompanied by a confrontation with that anxiety thereby reinforcing it. In the attempt to create British spaces in a foreign place, the strangeness of that place was made all the more striking and intimidating, while at the same time their display of power reassured the British subjects, lowering the threshold for the exercise of violence.

Crafting Entanglements: Afro-Asian Pasts of the Global Cold War (CRAFTE)

In the history of the Cold War, the global South often appears only as a theater of bloc politics between the East and West. Recent research has taken note of voices from Africa and Asia, yet little is known about their interconnections. To shed light on these, this project, conducted by Dr. Anandita Bajpai, engages with students’ and women's networks, media entanglements enabled by radio stations and film festivals, and the divided city of Berlin as an arena of South-South interconnections. The focus will be on the entangled trajectories of Asian and African actors and how these were embedded in, but also, how they shaped the global Cold War. The aim is to contribute to a more inclusive historiography by relying on the framework of global-entangled histories.

Entangled Wavelengths: International Radio Broadcasters & their Afro-Asian Listening Publics

Research project of Crafting Entanglements: Afro-Asian Pasts of the Global Cold War (CRAFTE)

This sub-project zooms into media entanglements across the Asian and African continents, which were enabled by international radio broadcasting in the Cold War years. Instead of focussing on the broadcasting or host countries of the stations (usually based in Euro-America or the Soviet Union), the key research 'sites' of the project are the places where the stations were heard. Although not intended as such by the stations, international broadcasting programmes enabled several listeners from Asian and African contexts to be informed of, engage, build networks, and initiate epistolary exchanges with each other. Following traces in radio archives, listeners' private collections and their oral testimonies, the project explores the nature of such entanglements and the possibilities listeners imagined them to offer.

This research emerges from a Habilitation project (thesis for qualifying as lecturer in Germany), which traces the affective trajectories of international radio broadcasters and their listening publics in India during the Cold War years. It explores radio’s material legacies by exclusively focussing on the social lives of radio-objects , which travelled between foreign broadcasting stations and their Indian listeners during the Cold War years. The presence of objects such as gifts, souvenirs, letters, photographs, radio journals, and a variety of radio-memorabilia in listeners’ homesteads/private collections even today and their affective relationship(s) to them can enable us to examine how radio materially permeated the larger social fabric of listeners’ everyday lives, not just through sound but also a plethora of things. In other words, I follow the trajectories of radio-objects to explore what a material history of radio could look like, how things unravel radio-pasts as sites of South-South entanglements and how radio-objects become windows to keepers’ biographies.

Field work for this project has been conducted in several towns, villages and medium-sized cities in the Indian states of Bihar (2018-19), Rajasthan (2022), Uttar Pradesh (2022, 2024), Haryana (2024) and Chattisgarh (2024).

Based on leads from this research, the sub-project within CRAFTE advances in two directions:

1. Tracing the Afro-Asian listeners' networks which were made possible by international broadcasting stations . This part of the research relies on Indian listeners as its nodal point of South-South networks. In focus is (a) how Indian listeners' expressed solidarity with anti-colonial, nationalist movements in African countries, or opposed the Apartheid regime in South Africa, and US interventions in Vietnam via radio and (b) how radio journals opened new networks of epistolary exchanges between Indian listeners and listeners from Ghana, Nigeria, Tanzania, Mauritius, South Africa, Uganda etc.

2. Exploring the limits of Afro-Asian solidarities in moments of crisis: This part will focus on the expulsion of Ugandan Asians from the country in 1972. How did different radio stations report on the expulsion? How were listening publics explained the same in different geopolitical contexts?

See full project description

The Global South and the Global Cold War in Berlin – the Divided City as a Locale for African-Asian-Solidarities

Dr. Maria Ketzmerick-Calandrino Research project of Crafting Entanglements: Afro-Asian Pasts of the Global Cold War (CRAFTE)

This subproject explores Afro-Asian actors in divided Berlin from 1961 to 1990, adopting a localized long-term perspective. It examines how local divisions, political bloc integration, and South-South solidarities intersect, with a focus on the interplay between globalized discourses and the everyday practices of racialization.

The project explores the connection between the Berlin Wall's division and the mobility of Afro-Asian actors, questioning the often-presumed closed nature of the Wall. The project highlights how the Wall functioned as both a local and international symbol, deeply embedded in specific political contexts. Additionally, the research examines the state's proclaimed solidarity with the Global South alongside the everyday racialization experienced by marginalized people. It seeks to analyze this tension and its implications for solidarities between different groups facing exclusion and marginalization.

The research is divided into three interrelated dimensions:

See full project description

Women's Internationalism(s) and Afro-Asian Networks: Cultural politics and Cold War in India

Research project of Crafting Entanglements: Afro-Asian Pasts of the Global Cold War (CRAFTE)

This project explores women’s internationalism(s) during the Cold War by particularly focusing on Indian wormen's Afro-Asian solidarity networks. Engaging with one particular organisation, Women’s International Democratic Federation (WIDF), it delves into how women from Asia and Africa shaped the organisation and how especially Indian actors utilised it as a platform to both shape their internationalist visions and craft the women’s rights movement in India.

The project explores Afro-Asianism and its manifestations in the Indian context by particularly focussing on women's role in forging Afro-Asian solidarity networks. It traces the lives of Indian women, who held important posts in the Women’s International Democratic Federation (WIDF). First founded in Paris in 1945, the WIDF was banned in France and moved to East Berlin in 1951. By closely following the trajectories of the organization's Indian members, the project engages with their activism in their own country, in such international organisations, and the networks they formed with women from the Global South.

The study explores how these women, while negotiating local and global issues of marginalisation, exploitation and inequality, were also performing a new worldview of internationalism(s), cosmopolitanism(s) and solidarities through protests, conferences, meetings and celebrations. It delves into how women’s societal roles as mothers, workers and citizens were being reimagined in an anti-war, anti imperialist and anti-racial worldview. At the same time, it will also uncover the limits and afterlives of these solidarities to see if, then how, international solidarity translated into local practice.

Archives

Besides biographical interviews, the project relies on research in the following archives:

Collections of the Institute of Social History (IISG), Amsterdam

P.C. Joshi Archives, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi

National Federation of Indian Women (NFIW) Archives, New Delhi

Communist Party of India (CPI) Archives, New Delhi and Kolkata

Collections at the Prime Ministers' Museum and Library, New Delhi

See full project description

Lived Socialism: On the Deployment of the FDJ Friendship Brigades of the Former GDR in Algeria 1964–1989: Development Aid, Socialism, and Diplomacy

Einzelprojekt von Crafting Entanglements: Afro-Asian Pasts of the Global Cold War (CRAFTE)

Das Dissertationsprojekt untersucht den Einsatz der FDJ-Brigaden („Brigaden der Freundschaft“) der ehemaligen DDR in Algerien im Zeitraum von 1964 bis 1989. Die Arbeit analysiert den Beitrag dieser Brigaden zur Entwicklungspolitik unmittelbar nach der algerischen Unabhängigkeit und beleuchtet ihre Funktion als Instrument einer „Nebenaußenpolitik“. Inmitten des Kalten Krieges dienten diese Einsätze dazu, die internationale Isolation der DDR zu durchbrechen und politische Anerkennung zu gewinnen. Das Projekt betrachtet die deutsch-algerischen Beziehungen aus einer kulturgeschichtlichen und historischen Perspektive und berücksichtigt dabei die deutsch-deutsche Systemkonkurrenz sowie die transnationale Triangulation zwischen Algerien, Deutschland und Frankreich.

See full project description

In Pursuit of ‘Legality’ and ‘Justice’. Minority Struggles in the Russian Empire and the Soviet Union

What did Muslim and Jewish groups in the Russian Empire, and Crimean Tatars, Chechens, Armenians, and other national groups under Soviet rule expect when they called on ‘justice’ and ‘legality’? And what did they achieve?

While there is no set definition of the ‘rule of law’, with over half a dozen indices competing for recognition, the Russian Empire and the Soviet Union would not score high on any of these. And yet, the notions of 'legality' (zakonnost’) and 'justice' (spravedlivost’) greatly mattered in both. Led by PD Dr. Stefan B. Kirmse, this ERC-funded project explores the ways in which ethnic and religious minorities, from the Russian Empire’s ‘Great Reforms’ of the 1860s to the dissolution of the USSR in 1991, routinely employed ‘legality’ and ‘justice’ to further and enforce their rights. In dialogue with local partners in six Soviet successor states, it looks at minority actors from both ‘above’ and ‘below’, as participants in policy-making and public debate, as judges and litigants, and as local activists.

Russian Colonialism, Georgian Jews, and Blood Libel in the Late Imperial Caucasus, 1850- 1914

Stefan B. Kirmse is the project head and principal investigator (PI) of JUSTIMINO. Kirmse’s research revolves around two distinct projects: The first, “Culture on Trial I: Russian Colonialism, Georgian Jews, and the Trans-local History of Blood Libel, 1850–1914”, analyzes a series of criminal trials in late imperial Russia that placed “culture” on trial, albeit indirectly. These cases revolved around accusations against non-Russian defendants of ritual crimes, highlighting the intersections of culture and legal narratives. By investigating notable cases such as the little-known Surami and Kutaisi blood libels in Georgia (1851–1853 and 1878–1880), in which Georgian Jews stood accused of murdering a Christian girl; the Multan ritual murder case in the Volga-Kama region (1893–1895); and the Beilis affair in Kiev (1911–1913), which caught national and international attention, this project will reveal how both the authorities and the accused leveraged the ideas of legality and justice in their accusations and defence.

‘Traditional Crime’ in Central Asia: Bride-kidnapping and the Payment of Kalym in Long-Term Perspective, 1860s-Present

The second research project, “Culture on Trial II: Everyday ‘Crime’ in Central Asia. The Imperial, Soviet and Post-Soviet States Dealing with Bride Kidnapping and the Payment of Bride Price, 1860–Present”, shifts the focus to the sociocultural practice of bride kidnapping and the payment of bride price in Central Asia, surveying their implications from the tsarist era through the Soviet period and into contemporary times. This research will examine how these practices, at times outlawed as “traditional crimes”, have been variously contested, accommodated and ultimately revived in modern society, providing a lens through which to analyze their endurance and transformation over time.

Legal Nationalism: Strategies of Seeking Justice in Post-Stalinist Armenian SSR

Gevorg Avetikyan, a postdoctoral researcher and annual fellow in JUSTIMINO project, takes a broader look at the concept of “socialist legality”, focusing on Armenian activists in the post-Stalinist era who, like many others, were granted their own national territory in the 1920s, in the research project “Legal Nationalism: Strategies of Seeking ‘Justice’ in the Post-Stalinist Armenian SSR”. The fact that ethnic Armenians enjoyed certain privileges in the Armenian SSR did not deter them from pursuing “justice” campaigns. Instead, it fostered a demand for broad civic freedoms in their republic, leading to a range of protests, from small intellectual circles to mass demonstrations. By the mid-1960s, their activism encompassed calls for a proper recognition and memorialization of the Armenian genocide, the teaching of Armenian history and the redrawing of borders (inspired in part by Lavrentii Beria’s territorial claims). Although some activities were deemed illegal and faced prosecution, many activists adopted a strategy of civil obedience, viewing their national and Soviet identities as compatible. Their advocacy was framed not only in terms of justice but also through the lens of legality, as they were aware of their rights and sought to test their boundaries. Avetikyan will explore various campaigns for “national rights” in Armenia, contextualizing them within the rise of nationalisms in post-Stalinist Soviet society. This investigation reveals interconnected histories: national activism was prominent across many union republics, fostering imitation and learning, while Armenian activism was also bolstered by internationalist initiatives that highlighted both national and global dimensions, as well as a strong diaspora.

Return to Norms: Stefania Shabatura and the Ukrainian Shistdesiatnyky

This dissertation will focus on the Ukrainian and Jewish “60ers,” or shistdesiatnyky dissident and artistic movement between the late 1950s and the mid 1980s in Kyiv and Lviv. It will look at the stages on which dissident thought emerged, asking why a small group of intellectuals, in broad strokes, moved from a vehement defense of legalistic Leninist principles to a broad advocacy for “universal human rights.” By focusing on a few thinkers– Leonid Plyushch, Semen Gluzman, Viktor Nekrasov, Oksana Meshko, Emmanuel Diamant and the more famous Vyacheslav Chornovil, Ivan Dziuba, Valentin Moroz, and Alla Horska, in whose milieus these dissidents found themselves, this dissertation will reconstruct the places, both physical and more ephemeral, in other words: the forums where their thought developed. Many of these forums are deeply connected to text, language, and a construction of the past: either historical or in memory. At meetings in commemoration of historical tragedies, during poetry reading evenings in apartments in the cities, on the constantly-changing stage of cheaply reproduced underground literature called samvydav in Ukrainian, at criminal trials and in cruel imprisonment, dissidents met other thinkers, other Soviet citizens and created a world of thought which changed and developed over time. Often marginalized in broader stories of European intellectual history of the 20th century, and comprehensive histories of late socialism, this dissertation will situate these Ukrainian and Jewish thinkers in two cities in Soveit Ukraine in broader histories of nationalism (Ukrainian, Zionist, national-communist), Soviet power, Ukrainian history, the development and use of language, and legal thinking, telling a story that is as much Jewish as it is Ukrainian, as much Soviet as it is European, and insofar as dissidents themselves considered it: universal as well.

Muslim Parliamentary Groups in the Russian State Duma, 1906–1916

Doctoral researcher Leo Hedrich focuses on Muslim experiences in matters of law-making with a project titled “Muslim Parliamentary Groups in the Russian State Duma, 1906–1916”. The research examines the dynamics among as few as six and as many as 37 deputies, representing a diverse range of ethnicities from across the Volga-Ural region, the Caucasus, Crimea and Central Asia. The representatives harnessed the language of legality, justice and past in-justices in discussions on two of the most virulent and divisive parliamentary issues in early 20th-century Russia: access to land and the regulation of migration, both from abroad and within the empire. As a result, the establishment of the Duma offered the promise of “justice” separate from the tsar and facilitated broad societal debate and competition, to which ordinary people contributed by flooding their deputies with letters and suggestions.

From Revolutionary to Socialist Legality: Georgian Perspectives

Doctoral researcher Katie Sartania also investigates dissident activities in the project “The Georgian Perspective on Soviet Legality and Justice: Dissident Activities and the Legacy of Stalin’s Influence (1950–1980)”. This work poses essential questions about identity and governance, including what did and does it mean to be both Georgian and Soviet? Furthermore, how did Georgians engage with the Soviet institutional framework of nation- building? Sartania aims to illustrate Stalin’s lasting impact on Georgian national identity and its trajectory. In the aftermath of Stalin’s death in 1953, subsequent political transformations, including Khrushchev’s de-Stalinization and the suppression of pro-Stalin protests in Tbilisi in 1956, irrevocably altered the dynamics between Georgia and Moscow. The events of the late 1950s marked a decisive shift in Georgian attitudes, as the population increasingly demanded their rights as entitled nationals rather than appealing to Moscow for assistance. The quest for cultural preservation, the safeguarding of traditions and the promotion of the Georgian language emerged as central themes of this period.

Russian–Ottoman Relations and the Karaite Question in Late Imperial Russia

Aikaterini Lykoudi, postdoctoral researcher, focuses on the evolving treatment and legal activism of Karaite Jews in the Black Sea region, a distinct religious community that is neither Rabbinic nor Talmudic. The project, titled “Russian–Ottoman Relations and the Karaite Question in Late Imperial Russia”, explores their unique historical trajectory within the Russian Empire, emphasizing the Karaite Jews’ cultural distinctiveness from Judaism. Karaite activists secured recognition as a religious group in the empire in 1837, gaining some autonomy in religious and administrative affairs. Lykoudi will also address their continuous struggle in the 1860s, when Karaites were legally separated from Judaism under imperial law, a process that continued into the late 19th century. In fact, local police and administrative officials faced challenges in classifying the Karaites, who shared characteristics with both Crimean Tatars, who were subject to imperial protection, and Crimean Jews, who faced various restrictions. The Karaites present a compelling case study, demonstrating the range of strategies available to both government policymakers and local elites in the Russian Empire. Lykoudi aims to focus on Crimean, Bessarabian and Istanbul Karaites and their role in the Jewish Enlightenment (Haskalah) between the Russian and the Ottoman empires. By exploring Karaite writing on their origins and legal emancipation, by tracking their archived correspondence with governors-general and different ministries in Saint Petersburg, and by examining their involvement in local court cases, Lykoudi will shed light on the importance of “legality” and “justice” in their campaigns and thus paint a nuanced picture of their changing image and voice.

Timely Histories: A Social History of Time in South Asia

TIMEHIST aims to write the history of time and temporal cultures in South Asia between the 1500s and the 1950s on a practice- and process-based approach to historical pasts. Covering this broad timespan under five modular units, the objective is to investigate and write the graded pasts of shifts and transformations that occurred within the temporal cultures of South Asia. In doing so, it departs from the usual approaches that focus either on the device (clock) or modern nation-state institutions such as army, school, factory, and office. Instead, while going beyond device-centrism, it puts ‘othered’ spaces of temporal practices such as field, farm, jungle, and river in the centre of the time’s history.

This five-year research project, headed by Dr. Nitin Sinha, started in January 2021. The project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (ERC Consolidator Grant) under grant agreement No 866421.

South Asian Nights: A History

Historically, work is seen as part of the day and the night is assumed to be the passive time for sleep. This assumption has led for long to the neglect of the history of the night, at least in the South Asian case.

Studying night as part of a social history of time poses a few fundamental questions: Was nocturnal temporality different than diurnal, and if yes, for whom and how? If control of time expressed exercise of power, how did the night confirm or configure the power established during the day? Was it necessarily the time of subversion and transgression? And finally, did the night mean the same for different social groups and along different spatial sites, primarily rural and urban?

The unit will explore the meaning of the nocturnal time, and the changes therein, at an interrelated cluster of sites that include work (prostitution and ‘nightsoil’ removal), crime (patrolling the city in the darkness), law (the role of the night in the making of the rule of law), and leisure and pleasure. The anxiety and fear of the night probably re-inscribed darkness as the colonial state from very early on tried to regulate nocturnal mobility and sociability. This aspect is of specific importance as it shows a crucial role played by the night in the conceptualisation of the ‘rule of law’, a point so far not made in South Asian legal history.

The legal regulation of the night in aspects of work and sociability, and crime and mobility must also be complemented with the examination of the moral and social articulations on the night. What was the night’s role in the making of the entity called private space or private time? While the growing use of street lighting in Europe from the 18th century extended the period of the night, did South Asia go through a similar change? My hypothesis is that the history of darkness was different between Europe and South Asia. The extent to which street lighting developed beyond presidency cities is a subject of future research. Following this, the unit will comparatively use sources – archival and literary – to compare nights in the rural and urban settings under the hypothesis that it was not just the social groups and hierarchies, technology and the state that interacted to give meaning to the night but night also was shaped differently in different spatial sites. This strand will move the story beyond the state into the realm of social engagement with the night along ideas of transgressions, romance, separation, and supernatural.

Time and Delay: Gendered Temporalities in Bengal in the 19th and 20th Centuries

With a focus on late nineteenth century Bengal and early post-colonial West Bengal, this unit will use ‘delay’ as an analytical category to investigate temporal experiences along the lines of gender. Part of Timely Histories: A Social History of Time in South Asia , this research is based on three main lines of enquiry.

First, the unit looks at the nature of ‘delays’ in modes of commutation like trains and trams meant for women who took up gainful employment in the city of Calcutta (Kolkata). This will be studied in the context of how such means of commuting were often essential for them to maintain a balance between professional and personal lives. Additionally, it will explore how their experiences differed from that of men when faced with delays while using the same means of travel.

Second, in distinction but also in conjunction with the office space of work on which usually temporal histories have been mapped, the research will use the home as an alternative site to comprehend ‘gendered’ experiences of temporality. Primarily of interest will be to examine how working women negotiated the diverse calendrical systems that governed their lives at the workplace and home.

Finally, the research will adopt a comparative methodology to account for social variations. Women who stayed back in villages would often depend on remittances sent by men of the family who went to cities for work. Understanding how such women responded to delays in receiving remittances will be a focus of this research. Whether they adopted alternative sources of livelihood as coping strategies and, if so, how they fared in relation to the type of jobs taken up by their urban counterparts will be one main area of investigation.

Light and Nocturnal-time: Materiality and Material Practices of Early Modern Nights in Mughal South Asia

As part of Timely Histories: A Social History of Time in South Asia , the unit focuses on early modern nights in Mughal South Asia as its principal theme of investigation. Existing narratives on early modern India predominantly treat daytime as the main temporal framework for exploring historical processes. Reassessing the familiar history of diurnality, the inquiry shifts the focus on nocturnality by situating it at the intersection of material culture and textual practices of the Mughal empire (16 th -18 th centuries).

It will explore night as a ‘social’ category where realms of power, technology of production, labour and object-practices coalesced in rendering the nightly functions of the expansive polity. Firstly, taking into consideration the spiritual and metaphoric domain of light and darkness, it would recast itself in the material preserve of the night-time by foregrounding the production and consumption patterns of pre-colonial lighting objects. A variegated range of Mughal illuminants, in their diversified physical and cultural forms would be examined for understanding objects’ deployment practices and circulatory mechanisms that became intrinsic to the nocturnal realities of the period. The role of imperial patronage and expanding commercial networks fostering the courtly ceremonies, religious gatherings, intellectual assemblies, social festivities, travel, economic transactions, hunting expeditions and military partaking would remain central in reevaluating early modern nights as unproductive or dormant. Secondly, it would focus on nights’ ecological dependence in growing and procuring of raw materials such as cotton, wax and oil. Charting the agricultural cultivation of oil-seeds, technology of oil-extraction and procurement-process of forest products such as beeswax, the unit attempts to recover the labour processes buttressing the nocturnal economy and craft-mechanism of Mughal illuminations. Colonial encounters and the role of local merchants as well as the European companies’ factors would also help navigate the demand-supply and circulation networks of the luminous objects. The mutual dependence and reciprocity of night and objects would further earmark the inquiry. Amplifying the same, the material world of early modern nights would be further examined through reconsidering darkness and lightened nights as time-units where acts of theft, looting, highway robberies, fire-accidents belied their celebratory and sensorial character. Bringing a corpus of Indo-Persian sources and colonial records in conversation with each other, the unit attempts to demonstrate the material world of early modern nocturnal culture in Mughal South Asia through a close study of unpublished textual and archival records.

The Economy of Hip-Hop Music Production in Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan (1990s–2021)

The present project is based on a doctoral research and examines the hip-hop music community in Kyrgyzstan’s capital Bishkek, with a focus on musical production and its context. Besides music makers, such as rappers and beatmakers, relevant actors also include other people involved in the production or distribution of music, such as sound engineers, managers and ‘hip-hop entrepreneurs’. In the research, I posit hip-hop music in Bishkek as an ‘art world’, where making music is an inherently collective activity, and a form of ‘creative labour’.

The project addresses the following questions: How do individuals get and remain engaged in the field of hip-hop music? How do they organise their creative labour in that field? How do they participate in structuring the Hip-Hop music economy in Bishkek and what consequences does that have for the creative labour of individuals?

The study builds up on a body of work examining the working conditions of artistic and musical creation and framing artistic activity as labour. Hip-hop music in Bishkek is a particularly interesting case as a relatively accessible artistic form in what can be deemed a musical periphery, far off dominant cultural flows and musical industries. The conditions of hip-hop music production in Kyrgyzstan thus resonate particularly well with a growing scholarship on ‘music economies’ in Africa and more generally so called ‘do-it-yourself’-like self-organisation of independent, peripherical musical collectivities.

In considering the community of Hip-Hop music in Bishkek as a single case study, my research takes a a historiographic approach, observing the evolution of Hip-Hop music production and distribution in Bishkek over the last 30 years. This allows me to draw comparisons over time, to describe the effects of technological change and to include more long-term trajectories of individuals and collectives, as well as socio-political change in Kyrgyzstan into the analysis.

The research project draws from ethnographic data collected during a total of 13 months of research stay between May 2019 and November 2021. This includes around 100 half-structured interviews with active and former Hip-Hop music makers, sound-engineers, and creative entrepreneurs, as well as informal, unrecorded conversations and notes from participant observation in places of music production (notably recording studios and filming sessions) and performance. This data is complemented by numerous available third-party interviews and news reports from local media and online-media, as well as available material from internet-forum discussions, the social media activity of relevant actors and traces of inactive specialised websites in the internet archive.

Relicts of (Another) Future? – The Afterlife of the Socialist City in Central Asia and the Southern Caucasus

Today, three decades after the fall of the system to which they owe their existence, Soviet-era materiality are simultaneously relicts of the past and reminders of a future-that-was-not scattered around what has now become, after all, a rapidly changing, neo-liberal urban space. In many ways, as it is true for all fallen empires of history, the architectural legacy outlives the system to which it owes its existence - yet do the ideas ingrained into the urban fabric do so, as well?

The project "Relicts of (Another) Future" explores how Soviet urbanity as a physical remainder of the ancien régime conditions the social life in post-Soviet cities today. Reading urban space as an 'embattled geography' where competing imaginaries of past and future are inscribed (and erased), this project sets out to reconstruct multi-layered antagonistic maps: socialist future-scape versus ethno-national past-scape. Tracing semiotic cracks in the surface of the newly-minted national landscapes, it sheds light on how the ‘unfinished futures’ of the socialist project may mobilize alternative historical imaginaries that may challenge the rising ethno-centric discourse of today. For this, the project turns to two exemplary laboratories of urban space in the former Soviet South: Central Asia (Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan) and the Southern Caucasus (Yerevan, Armenia). There it explores the mobilizing power of Soviet-era ‘materialized memory’ in a field of tension between rising populism, political alienation and competing visions of the future.

The project will result in the monograph Life After Future - Unmarginalizing Urbanities from the Former Soviet South (tentative title). In pursuit of the question – what is left of the socialist city? – the aim of this book project is not only to trace the material and mnemonic remains of the socialist city but to show how the Soviet discourse of the city engendered radical ideas that at times would challenge the narrow confines of state socialism itself. These are, for instance, the efforts of Esperanto-speaking internationalists from Czechoslovakia to build the internationalist city from below in the Central Asian steppe, the quest of Armenian Futurists to root the architectural style of Soviet Armenia in the country’s Persianate heritage, or the vision of a Jewish-Kyrgyz philosopher of turning a science town in the hinterland of Moscow into the first ecopolis of the USSR. Penned between the antagonistic poles of spectacular actualization and colossal failure, the research approaches the South Soviet Urban not as a closed system of rigidified meaning but instead as a myriad of fragmented experiential strands that altogether make up for a polyphonic account of what the Southern republics’ pathway to the city was about. Ultimately turning to the crisis-ridden moment of the current present, the book concludes with the question: what does it mean, three decades after the demise of state socialism, to inhabit cities built for a future that has never arrived?

A Tale of Two Narratives: Deliberative Systems in Egypt during the French Military Campaign of 1798–1801 and the Inception of the Modern Middle East

The PhD project “a Tale of Two Narratives” will provide a detailed analysis of the deliberative systems and proto-democratic or proto-parliamentarian structures in Egypt established during French imperial rule of 1798–1801. As such, it will explore their functions, formations and operations within the greater framework of European imperialism and Ottoman hegemony. The project will utilize a plethora of differing sources including contemporary Arabic chronicles, personal testimonies and correspondences of the French officer corps as well as the accounts of the savants accompanying the French expedition, pamphlets, proclamations and newspapers produced in Egypt during 1798–1801, and official documentation appertaining to the expedition found in various archives within Europe and the Middle East. Furthermore, the project will discuss how these structures where influenced by previous modes of participation established before 1798 and how they affected Egypt’s political system in the first half of the 19 th century.

Proceeding from that, the dissertation will reflect upon whether the French military campaign should be considered to constitute the inception of a so-called Modern Middle East and the initial foundational period of democracy in the Arab and Muslim world. For that it will provide a postcolonial critique of dominant narratives on the inception of democracy, processes of democratization and the rise of modernity in the Arab world and Egypt in particular. As part of the HISDEMAB (“Historicity of Democracy in the Arab and Muslim Worlds”) – project, the dissertation aims at providing a historical contextualization of the Middle East’s long road towards democratization and troubled history of European colonialism in the region.

Lived Geopolitics: Rescaling Market Infrastructures in Odesa and Bishkek from Soviet Collapse to Backlash Imperialism

Since their independence in 1991, Ukraine and Kyrgyzstan are caught at the crossroads of competing geopolitical stakeholders and post-imperial reverberations. While there is abundant research on strategic power struggles in the region, little is known about how local communities engage with geopolitics. Through extensive, multi-sited ethnography, my work tackles the nexus of macro-scale power politics and the micro-scale of everyday life at two sites that are intricately and intensely entangled with geopolitical dynamics: the 7Km Market in Odesa, and the Dordoi Bazaar in Bishkek. Located in two historically related, yet vastly different former Soviet republics, I show how past configurations of labor, gender, and space have shaped contemporary infrastructures of bottom-up global trade. Built from double-stacked shipping containers, the two markets have become key nodes in a transnational network linking goods from Turkey, China, Korea, and beyond with consumers across Eurasia. As modular, dynamic, shape-shifting hubs they stimulating economic innovation and extra-economic sociality, yet their embeddedness in global supply chains also exposes traders to shifting border regimes and mobility constraints, shaped by foreign policy shifts and international conflict.

Correspondingly, my research employs a relational lens to examine the post-1991 trajectories of Ukraine and Kyrgyzstan, positioning these markets as laboratories for post-Soviet geopolitical rivalries. Emphasizing traders’ geopolitical awareness and the adaptive livelihood strategies reflected in both talk and practice, my approach critiques strictly top-down views of geopolitics and reductive portrayals of economic actors as mere agents of the market. Instead, I provide nuanced insights into the interplay between market infrastructures, geopolitical shifts and everyday economic practices – an intersection I conceptualise as ‘lived geopolitics.’ The concept challenges geopolitics’ classical detachment from the vernacular and its confinement to the scale of the state, by emphasizing multidirectional entanglements across scales.

Methodologically, this research is grounded in years (2018–2024) of multi-sited ethnographic fieldwork at retail hubs in Russia, Ukraine, and Kyrgyzstan. It combines extended participant observation in markets and container shops with diverse qualitative methods: oral history interviews with 1990s shuttle traders, semi-structured interviews with current traders and market managers, and numerous informal conversations with traders, drivers, cleaners, and food vendors. During the pandemic, digital ethnography included active engagement in social media discussions and surveys. Repeated field visits captured the evolving impacts of key geopolitical events such as Kyrgyzstan’s accession to the Eurasian Economic Union, the Covid-19 pandemic, and Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, while fostering trust-based relationships.

My forthcoming monograph aims to rethink post-Soviet markets as historically grounded, relational infrastructures embedded in global circuits. By examining communalities and differences in the developments of market trade in Ukraine and Kyrgyzstan my work advances comparison as a relational mode of anthropological inquiry. Conceptualising market actors as active participants in rather than passive recipients of geopolitical change, I bring geopolitical processes into sharper ethnographic focus.

The book project is generousl y supported by the Independent Social Research Foundation

Key publication from this project:

Eggart, C., 2023b. “Made in Kyrgyzstan is Gold!” The Rise of the Informal Kyrgyzstani Apparel Industry . Third World Quarterly. ahead-of-print, 1–18. https://doi.org/10.1080/01436597.2023.2254242

After Authoritarianism: How Political Thinking Travels With Syrians to Germany and Denmark

Focusing on Syrian refugees in Germany and Denmark, the project investigates how memories of life under authoritarian rule in Syria impact subject-formation in new political and social contexts. It does so by exploring how Syrians draw parallels to Syria when they navigate in relation to legal frameworks and authorities in host states.

The project heuristically conceptualizes comparison, exemplification and framing as three key ways in which Syrians activate memories of Syria. In extension of this conceptualization, it examines how specific comparisons shine a new light on what is compared, how examples make it possible to think the general through the particular and how framing enables focus but also limits what comes into view.

The project builds on ethnographic fieldwork among Syrians in Germany and Denmark and aims to develop new knowledge of the processes through which refugees become specific kinds of political subjects in relation to their host communities.

The research is funded by the Carlsberg Foundation.
